Add quai namespace and CAIP-2 spec (#145)
ChainAgnostic/namespaces: quai/README.md

---
namespace-identifier: quai
title: Quai Namespace
author: ["Jonathan Downing (@jdowning100)", "Dr. K (@mechanikalk)"]
status: Draft
type: Informational
created: 2025-06-18
---

# Namespace for Quai Network

Quai is a decentralized, merge-mined, EVM-compatible Layer 1 network of blockchains that leverages a next-generation Proof-of-Work consensus mechanism called Proof-of-Entropy-Minima to eliminate block contention and provide lightning fast finality. Unlike traditional multi-chain systems, Quai uses a single global chain ID (9) for all shards and routes transactions based on address location, not per-chain logic, in which every address deterministically maps to a shard via its first byte. It supports protobuf-encoded transactions rather than RLP-encoded, setting it apart from standard Ethereum-based networks.

## Rationale

> Quai’s unique architectural model necessitates a distinct namespace for proper identification and interoperability. While it shares EVM compatibility, its divergence in transaction encoding (protobuf), shard-based address space, and shared global chain ID differentiate it from traditional Ethereum forks. Currently, only one shard is active in Quai, so integration is relatively simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quai’s unique architectural model necessitates a distinct namespace for proper identification and interoperability. While it shares EVM compatibility at the level of contract execution, its divergence in transaction encoding (protobuf), shard-based address space, and shared global chain ID differentiate it from traditional Ethereum forks. Currently, only one shard is active in Quai, so integration is relatively simple.
```

> This namespace ensures that cross-chain tools such as WalletConnect, DID methods, and asset resolvers can interpret Quai’s model accurately — especially given the single-chain ID model combined with a sharded execution environment.

Author: Also, there is a single chain ID for all shards, which is what I was referring to by "single-chain ID model"

## Governance

Quai protocol upgrades and standards are driven by the Quai Foundation in coordination with the Quai developer community. Improvement proposals are documented via QIPs (Quai Improvement Proposals), with reference implementations and discussion led through the official GitHub repositories and Discord. Final decisions for protocol-level changes are currently stewarded by core contributors, with an aim toward more decentralized governance in future roadmap stages.

> All RPC compatibility, chain metadata, and transaction standards are maintained openly at [docs.qu.ai](https://docs.qu.ai) and the [QIPs github repository](https://github.com/quai-network/qips). Developers are encouraged to participate in network design and contribute implementations via the quais.js SDK and go-quai node software repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All RPC compatibility, chain metadata, and transaction standards are maintained openly at [docs.qu.ai][Quai Docs] and the [QIPs github repository][go-quia Github]. Developers are encouraged to participate in network design and contribute implementations via the quais.js SDK and go-quai node software repositories.
```
